hello friends and welcome to study
tonight in this video we will try to
understand the concept of normalization
in database we will start with
understanding what all problems arise if
a table or a database is not normalized
and how normalization solves this
problem so what is normalization
normalization is a technique of
organizing the data into multiple
related tables to minimize data
redundancy now you would ask what is
data redundancy and why should we reduce
it well data redundancy is nothing but
repetition of similar data at multiple
places and we want to reduce it
not just because repetition of similar
data multiple times eats up extra space
but it also leads to multiple other
issues like insertion deletion and
updation anomalies for now let's start
with a very basic example and try to
understand data redundancy and the
problems that we face due to it so here
we have a simple student table to store
student information in a college we have
columns roll number student name the
branch or the department name the name
of the hid or the head of the department
you can call it a teacher name as well
and the Department telephone number now
let's put data of four computer science
students into this table we'll add row
number one two three and four put in the
students name their branch name the name
of the hid and the Department telephone
number now in this case the branch name
the hid name and the telephone number
are same for all the entries that we
make whenever a new student entry is
created this entire information is
repeated and this is what is redundancy
now this data redundancy not only
increased the size of our DB
unnecessarily but it also leads to
multiple
other issues like we talked about so
let's see what these issues are there
are three main problems that data
redundancy causes these are the
insertion anomaly the deletion anomaly
and the updation anomaly so let's start
with insertion anomaly now we already
have four students data in our table if
we have to add a fifth student we will
have to repeat the same data which holds
the branch information like branch name
the name of the h.o.t and the branch
telephone number again and if we have to
enter the data for hundred more students
we have to repeat the data 100 more
times which leads to insertion anomaly
because the repetition of data will only
increase as we insert more entries to
our table now this repetition arises
because in our example we are
unknowingly unintentionally saving two
pieces of information in every row
Student Information and branch
information now if we start deleting
student information the branch
information is also deleted
simultaneously and when we delete the
last student row from the student table
we also unintentionally delete the
branch information so now we don't have
any student information and we also
don't have the branch information
because we deleted it which leads to
deletion problems and is also known as
deletion anomaly now let's see what
updation anomaly or modification anomaly
is so let's say if the H OD or the head
of the department leaves for some reason
making the students happy and the
department gets a new actually and the
system administrator has to update all
the student records with the new name of
th OD this is modification anomaly
because this is hell lot of a world
which the administrator has to do to
update every single record with the new
H OD name
and during modification if even a single
row is missed out it will lead to
inconsistent data
hence data redundancy can also lead to
inconsistency in data as a result of
updation anomaly now you understand that
data redundancy is pure evil not only
because it eats up extra space but it
leads to problem in inserting new data
deleting the data and a huge problem if
we have to update the data so now the
million-dollar question is how
normalization will solve this problem
so normalization will break the existing
student table into two different tables
student table and branch table the
student table will save the data of
student and the branch table will save
the branch information now the branch
information if we want to save data of
computer science department students
will be just one row that will be the
branch name computer science the name of
the Acholi the new actually I must say
because the old actually left and the
phone number of the department and in
the student table will keep all the
information of the students enrolled for
this particular branch and these tables
will be related by the name of the
branch in our case which is CS e one can
see that the branch name is still
getting repeated in the students table
so normalization is not about
eliminating data redundancy it's about
minimizing data redundancy so now
earlier where all the branch information
was getting repeated with each and every
student record now only the branch name
is repeated because the branch
information is kept in a different table
and if we want to update any branch
information we just have to update it at
one place and it will automatically be
updated when we fetch a student record
because the student record is connected
with the branch record using the branch
name and if we update the h.o.t name or
the phone number in the branch table
it's updated for all the students
now as a redundancy is minimized
hence the problems which arise due to it
are also minimized let's see how the
problems are solved
now if we have to insert a new student
data we only have to enter the roll
number the student name and just the
branch name because the branch
information is stored separately and we
don't have to modify or insert it again
then we have to delete student
information at the end of a session to
store information of the students for
the new batch we can just delete all the
student records and we'll still have the
branch information branch details in a
separate table safe and if we have to
update the name of the h.o.t again or
the department's phone number we just
have to do it in one place
see how normalization solves a lot of
problems by just dividing the data into
separate independent logical entities
and relating them using a common key or
you can say a unique name in our case
that is the branch name so normalization
can be achieved in multiple ways we have
three basic normal forms in which we can
achieve normalization they are first
normal form second normal form and the
third normal form and another more
advanced normalization technique which
is known as B C and F we will learn
about all the ordinary forms in our
coming videos so stay tuned and do
subscribe to the study tonight channel